docs/src/pest_method.md, before:

```@meta
CollapsedDocStrings=true
```

# [Parameter Estimation Methods](@id pest_methods)

The main function of PEtab.jl is to create parameter estimation problems and provide runtime-efficient gradient and Hessian functions for estimating unknown model parameters using suitable numerical optimization algorithms. Specifically, the parameter estimation problems considered by PEtab.jl are on the form:

```math
\min_{\mathbf{x} \in \mathbb{R}^N} -\ell(\mathbf{x}), \quad \text{subject to} \\
\mathbf{lb} \leq \mathbf{x} \leq \mathbf{ub}
```

Where, since PEtab.jl works with likelihoods (see the [API](@ref API) documentation on `PEtabObservable`), $-\ell(\mathbf{x})$ is a negative log-likelihood, and $\mathbf{lb}$ and $\mathbf{ub}$ are the lower and upper parameter bounds. For a good introduction to parameter estimation for ODE models in biology (which is applicable to other fields as well), see [villaverde2022protocol](@cite).

This advanced section of the documentation focuses on PEtab.jl's parameter estimation functionality, and before reading this part, we recommended the starting [tutorial](@ref tutorial). Specifically, this section of the documentation covers available and recommended optimization algorithms, how to plot optimization results, and how to perform automatic model selection. First though, it covers how to perform parameter estimation. While the `PEtabODEProblem` contains all the necessary information for wrapping a suitable optimizer to solve the problem (see [here](@ref wrap_est)), manually wrapping optimizers is cumbersome. Therefore, PEtab.jl provides convenient wrappers for:

- Single-start parameter estimation
- Multi-start parameter estimation
- Creating an `OptimizationProblem` to access the solvers in [Optimization.jl](https://github.com/SciML/Optimization.jl)

As a working example, we use the Michaelis-Menten enzyme kinetics model from the starting [tutorial](@ref tutorial). Even though the code below presents the model as a `ReactionSystem`, everything works the same if the model is provided as an `ODESystem`.

```@example 1
using Catalyst, PEtab

# Create the dynamic model
t = default_t()
rn = @reaction_network begin
    @parameters S0 c3=1.0
    @species S(t)=S0
    c1, S + E --> SE
    c2, SE --> S + E
    c3, SE --> P + E
end
speciemap = [:E => 50.0, :SE => 0.0, :P => 0.0]

# Observables
@unpack E, S = rn
obs_sum = PEtabObservable(S + E, 3.0)
@unpack P = rn
@parameters sigma
obs_p = PEtabObservable(P, sigma)
observables = Dict("obs_p" => obs_p, "obs_sum" => obs_sum)

# Parameters to estimate
p_c1 = PEtabParameter(:c1)
p_c2 = PEtabParameter(:c2)
p_s0 = PEtabParameter(:S0)
p_sigma = PEtabParameter(:sigma)
pest = [p_c1, p_c2, p_s0, p_sigma]

# Simulate measurement data with 'true' parameters
using OrdinaryDiffEq, DataFrames
ps = [:c1 => 1.0, :c2 => 10.0, :c3 => 1.0, :S0 => 100.0]
u0 = [:S => 100.0, :E => 50.0, :SE => 0.0, :P => 0.0]
tspan = (0.0, 10.0)
oprob = ODEProblem(rn, u0, tspan, ps)
sol = solve(oprob, Rodas5P(); saveat = 0:0.5:10.0)
obs_sum = (sol[:S] + sol[:E]) .+ randn(length(sol[:E]))
obs_p = sol[:P] + .+ randn(length(sol[:P]))
df_sum = DataFrame(obs_id = "obs_sum", time = sol.t, measurement = obs_sum)
df_p = DataFrame(obs_id = "obs_p", time = sol.t, measurement = obs_p)
measurements = vcat(df_sum, df_p)

model = PEtabModel(rn, observables, measurements, pest; speciemap = speciemap)
petab_prob = PEtabODEProblem(model)
nothing # hide
```

## Single-Start Parameter Estimation

Single-start parameter estimation is an approach where a numerical optimization algorithm is run from a starting point `x0` until it hopefully reaches a local minimum. When performing parameter estimation, the objective function generated by a `PEtabODEProblem` expects the parameters to be in a specific order. The most straightforward way to obtain a correctly ordered vector is via the `get_x` function:

```@docs; canonical=false
get_x
```

For our working example, we have:

```@example 1
x0 = get_x(petab_prob)
```

As discussed in the starting tutorial, `x0` is a `ComponentArray`, meaning it holds both parameter values and names. Additionally, parameters like `c1` have a `log10` prefix, as the parameter (by default) is estimated on the `log10` scale, which typically improves performance [raue2013lessons, hass2019benchmark](@cite). Interacting with a `ComponentArray` is straightforward, for example, to change `c1` to `10.0` do:

```@example 1
x0.log10_c1 = log10(10.0)
nothing # hide
```

or alteratively:

```@example 1
x0[:log10_c1] = log10(10.0)
nothing # hide
```

!!! note
    When setting values in the starting point vector `x0`, the new value should be provided on the parameter's scale, which is `log10` by default.

Given a starting point, parameter estimation can be performed with the `calibrate` function:

```@docs; canonical=false
calibrate
```

For information and recommendations on algorithms (`alg`), see [this](@ref options_optimizers) page. For our working example, following the recommendations, we use Optim.jl's Interior-Point Newton method (`IPNewton`):

```@example 1
using Optim
res = calibrate(petab_prob, x0, IPNewton())
```

The result from `calibrate` is returned as a `PEtabOptimisationResult` which holds the relevant statistics from the optimization:

```@docs; canonical=false
PEtabOptimisationResult
```

The result from `calibrate` can also be plotted. For example, to see how well the model fits the data, the fit can be plotted as:

```@example 1
using Plots
default(left_margin=12.5Plots.Measures.mm, bottom_margin=12.5Plots.Measures.mm, size = (600*1.25, 400 * 1.25), palette = ["#CC79A7", "#009E73", "#0072B2", "#D55E00", "#999999", "#E69F00", "#56B4E9", "#F0E442"], linewidth=4.0) # hide
plot(res, petab_prob)
```

Information on other available plots can be found on [this](@ref optimization_output_plotting) page. Now, even though the plot above may look good, it is important to remember that the objective function ($-\ell$ above) often has multiple local minima. To ensure the global optimum is found, a global optimization approach is needed. One effective global method is multi-start parameter estimation.

## Multi-Start Parameter Estimation

Multi-start parameter estimation is an approach where `n` parameter estimation runs are initiated from `n` random starting points. The rationale is that a subset of these runs should, hopefully, converge to the global optimum. While simple, empirical benchmark studies have shown that this method performs well for ODE models in biology [raue2013lessons, raue2013lessons](@cite).

The first step for multi-start parameter estimation is to generate `n` starting points. While random uniform sampling may initially seem like a good approach, random points tend to cluster. Instead, it's better to use a [Quasi-Monte Carlo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quasi-Monte_Carlo_method) method, such as [Latin hypercube sampling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_hypercube_sampling), to generate more spread-out starting points. This approach has been shown to improve performance [raue2013lessons](@cite). The difference can quite clearly be seen generating 100 random points and 50 Latin hypercube-sampled points on the plane.

```@example 1
using Distributions, QuasiMonteCarlo, Plots
import Random # hide
Random.seed!(123) # hide
s1 = QuasiMonteCarlo.sample(100, [-1.0, -1.0], [1.0, 1.0], Uniform())
s2 = QuasiMonteCarlo.sample(100, [-1.0, -1.0], [1.0, 1.0], LatinHypercubeSample())
p1 = plot(s1[1, :], s1[2, :], title = "Uniform sampling", seriestype=:scatter)
p2 = plot(s2[1, :], s2[2, :], title = "Latin Hypercube Sampling", seriestype=:scatter)
p1 = plot(s1[1, :], s1[2, :], title = "Uniform sampling", seriestype=:scatter, label = false) # hide
p2 = plot(s2[1, :], s2[2, :], title = "Latin Hypercube Sampling", seriestype=:scatter, label = false) # hide
plot(p1, p2)
plot(p1, p2; size = (800, 400)) # hide
```

For a `PEtabODEProblem`, Latin hypercube sampled points within the parameter bounds can be generated with the `get_startguesses` function:

```@docs; canonical=false
get_startguesses
```

For our working example, we can generate 50 starting guesses with:

```@example 1
import Random # hide
Random.seed!(123) # hide
x0s = get_startguesses(petab_prob, 50)
nothing # hide
```

In principle, `x0s` can now be used together with `calibrate` to perform multi-start parameter estimation. But, to further simplify this process, PEtab.jl provides a convenient function, `calibrate_multistart`, which combines start-guess generation and parameter estimation in one step:

```@docs; canonical=false
calibrate_multistart
```

An important keyword argument for `calibrate_multistart` is `dirsave`, which specifies an optional directory to continuously save the results from each individual run. We **strongly recommend** providing such a directory, as parameter estimation for larger models can take hours or even days. If something goes wrong with the computer during that time, it is, to put it mildly, frustrating to lose all the results. For our working example, we can perform 50 multi-starts with:

```@example 1
ms_res = calibrate_multistart(petab_prob, IPNewton(), 50, dirsave="path_to_save_directory")
```

The results are returned as a `PEtabMultistartResult`, which, in addition to printout statistics, contains relevant information for each run:

```@docs; canonical=false
PEtabMultistartResult
```

Finally, a common approach to evaluate the result of multi-start parameter estimation is through plotting. One widely used evaluation plot is the waterfall plot, which shows the final objective values for each run:

```@example 1
plot(ms_res; plot_type=:waterfall)
```

In the waterfall plot, each plateau corresponds to different local optima (represented by different colors). Since many runs (dots) are found on the plateau with the smallest objective value, we can be confident that the global optimum has been found. In addition to waterfall plots, more plotting options can be found on [this](@ref optimization_output_plotting) page.

## Creating an OptimizationProblem

[Optimization.jl](https://github.com/SciML/Optimization.jl) is a Julia package that provides a unified interface for over 100 optimization algorithms (see their [documentation](https://docs.sciml.ai/Optimization/stable/) for the complete list). While Optimization.jl is undoubtedly useful, it is currently undergoing heavy updates, so at the moment we do not recommend it as the default choice for parameter estimation.

The central object in Optimization.jl is the `OptimizationProblem`, and PEtab.jl directly supports converting a `PEtabODEProblem` into an `OptimizationProblem`:

```@docs; canonical=false
PEtab.OptimizationProblem
```

For our working example, we can create an `OptimizationProblem` with:

```@example 1
using Optimization
opt_prob = OptimizationProblem(petab_prob)
```

Given a start-guess `x0`, we can then estimate the parameters using, for example, Optim.jl's `ParticleSwarm()` method, with:

```@example 1
using OptimizationOptimJL
opt_prob.u0 .= x0
res = solve(opt_prob, Optim.ParticleSwarm())
```

which returns an `OptimizationSolution`. For more information on options and how to interact with `OptimizationSolution`, see the Optimization.jl [documentation](https://docs.sciml.ai/Optimization/stable/).

## References

```@bibliography
Pages = ["pest_method.md"]
Canonical = false
```

Commit message:

Update docs with option to run in parallel

docs/src/pest_method.md, after:

```@meta
CollapsedDocStrings=true
```

# [Parameter Estimation Methods](@id pest_methods)

The main function of PEtab.jl is to create parameter estimation problems and provide runtime-efficient gradient and Hessian functions for estimating unknown model parameters using suitable numerical optimization algorithms. Specifically, the parameter estimation problems considered by PEtab.jl are on the form:

```math
\min_{\mathbf{x} \in \mathbb{R}^N} -\ell(\mathbf{x}), \quad \text{subject to} \\
\mathbf{lb} \leq \mathbf{x} \leq \mathbf{ub}
```

Where, since PEtab.jl works with likelihoods (see the [API](@ref API) documentation on `PEtabObservable`), $-\ell(\mathbf{x})$ is a negative log-likelihood, and $\mathbf{lb}$ and $\mathbf{ub}$ are the lower and upper parameter bounds. For a good introduction to parameter estimation for ODE models in biology (which is applicable to other fields as well), see [villaverde2022protocol](@cite).

This advanced section of the documentation focuses on PEtab.jl's parameter estimation functionality, and before reading this part, we recommended the starting [tutorial](@ref tutorial). Specifically, this section of the documentation covers available and recommended optimization algorithms, how to plot optimization results, and how to perform automatic model selection. First though, it covers how to perform parameter estimation. While the `PEtabODEProblem` contains all the necessary information for wrapping a suitable optimizer to solve the problem (see [here](@ref wrap_est)), manually wrapping optimizers is cumbersome. Therefore, PEtab.jl provides convenient wrappers for:

- Single-start parameter estimation
- Multi-start parameter estimation
- Creating an `OptimizationProblem` to access the solvers in [Optimization.jl](https://github.com/SciML/Optimization.jl)

As a working example, we use the Michaelis-Menten enzyme kinetics model from the starting [tutorial](@ref tutorial). Even though the code below presents the model as a `ReactionSystem`, everything works the same if the model is provided as an `ODESystem`.

```@example 1
using Catalyst, PEtab

# Create the dynamic model
t = default_t()
rn = @reaction_network begin
    @parameters S0 c3=1.0
    @species S(t)=S0
    c1, S + E --> SE
    c2, SE --> S + E
    c3, SE --> P + E
end
speciemap = [:E => 50.0, :SE => 0.0, :P => 0.0]

# Observables
@unpack E, S = rn
obs_sum = PEtabObservable(S + E, 3.0)
@unpack P = rn
@parameters sigma
obs_p = PEtabObservable(P, sigma)
observables = Dict("obs_p" => obs_p, "obs_sum" => obs_sum)

# Parameters to estimate
p_c1 = PEtabParameter(:c1)
p_c2 = PEtabParameter(:c2)
p_s0 = PEtabParameter(:S0)
p_sigma = PEtabParameter(:sigma)
pest = [p_c1, p_c2, p_s0, p_sigma]

# Simulate measurement data with 'true' parameters
using OrdinaryDiffEq, DataFrames
ps = [:c1 => 1.0, :c2 => 10.0, :c3 => 1.0, :S0 => 100.0]
u0 = [:S => 100.0, :E => 50.0, :SE => 0.0, :P => 0.0]
tspan = (0.0, 10.0)
oprob = ODEProblem(rn, u0, tspan, ps)
sol = solve(oprob, Rodas5P(); saveat = 0:0.5:10.0)
obs_sum = (sol[:S] + sol[:E]) .+ randn(length(sol[:E]))
obs_p = sol[:P] + .+ randn(length(sol[:P]))
df_sum = DataFrame(obs_id = "obs_sum", time = sol.t, measurement = obs_sum)
df_p = DataFrame(obs_id = "obs_p", time = sol.t, measurement = obs_p)
measurements = vcat(df_sum, df_p)

model = PEtabModel(rn, observables, measurements, pest; speciemap = speciemap)
petab_prob = PEtabODEProblem(model)
nothing # hide
```

## Single-Start Parameter Estimation

Single-start parameter estimation is an approach where a numerical optimization algorithm is run from a starting point `x0` until it hopefully reaches a local minimum. When performing parameter estimation, the objective function generated by a `PEtabODEProblem` expects the parameters to be in a specific order. The most straightforward way to obtain a correctly ordered vector is via the `get_x` function:

```@docs; canonical=false
get_x
```

For our working example, we have:

```@example 1
x0 = get_x(petab_prob)
```

As discussed in the starting tutorial, `x0` is a `ComponentArray`, meaning it holds both parameter values and names. Additionally, parameters like `c1` have a `log10` prefix, as the parameter (by default) is estimated on the `log10` scale, which typically improves performance [raue2013lessons, hass2019benchmark](@cite). Interacting with a `ComponentArray` is straightforward, for example, to change `c1` to `10.0` do:

```@example 1
x0.log10_c1 = log10(10.0)
nothing # hide
```

or alteratively:

```@example 1
x0[:log10_c1] = log10(10.0)
nothing # hide
```

!!! note
    When setting values in the starting point vector `x0`, the new value should be provided on the parameter's scale, which is `log10` by default.

Given a starting point, parameter estimation can be performed with the `calibrate` function:

```@docs; canonical=false
calibrate
```

For information and recommendations on algorithms (`alg`), see [this](@ref options_optimizers) page. For our working example, following the recommendations, we use Optim.jl's Interior-Point Newton method (`IPNewton`):

```@example 1
using Optim
res = calibrate(petab_prob, x0, IPNewton())
```

The result from `calibrate` is returned as a `PEtabOptimisationResult` which holds the relevant statistics from the optimization:

```@docs; canonical=false
PEtabOptimisationResult
```

The result from `calibrate` can also be plotted. For example, to see how well the model fits the data, the fit can be plotted as:

```@example 1
using Plots
default(left_margin=12.5Plots.Measures.mm, bottom_margin=12.5Plots.Measures.mm, size = (600*1.25, 400 * 1.25), palette = ["#CC79A7", "#009E73", "#0072B2", "#D55E00", "#999999", "#E69F00", "#56B4E9", "#F0E442"], linewidth=4.0) # hide
plot(res, petab_prob)
```

Information on other available plots can be found on [this](@ref optimization_output_plotting) page. Now, even though the plot above may look good, it is important to remember that the objective function ($-\ell$ above) often has multiple local minima. To ensure the global optimum is found, a global optimization approach is needed. One effective global method is multi-start parameter estimation.

## [Multi-Start Parameter Estimation](@id multistart_est)

Multi-start parameter estimation is an approach where `n` parameter estimation runs are initiated from `n` random starting points. The rationale is that a subset of these runs should, hopefully, converge to the global optimum. While simple, empirical benchmark studies have shown that this method performs well for ODE models in biology [raue2013lessons, raue2013lessons](@cite).

The first step for multi-start parameter estimation is to generate `n` starting points. While random uniform sampling may initially seem like a good approach, random points tend to cluster. Instead, it's better to use a [Quasi-Monte Carlo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quasi-Monte_Carlo_method) method, such as [Latin hypercube sampling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_hypercube_sampling), to generate more spread-out starting points. This approach has been shown to improve performance [raue2013lessons](@cite). The difference can quite clearly be seen generating 100 random points and 50 Latin hypercube-sampled points on the plane.

```@example 1
using Distributions, QuasiMonteCarlo, Plots
import Random # hide
Random.seed!(123) # hide
s1 = QuasiMonteCarlo.sample(100, [-1.0, -1.0], [1.0, 1.0], Uniform())
s2 = QuasiMonteCarlo.sample(100, [-1.0, -1.0], [1.0, 1.0], LatinHypercubeSample())
p1 = plot(s1[1, :], s1[2, :], title = "Uniform sampling", seriestype=:scatter)
p2 = plot(s2[1, :], s2[2, :], title = "Latin Hypercube Sampling", seriestype=:scatter)
p1 = plot(s1[1, :], s1[2, :], title = "Uniform sampling", seriestype=:scatter, label = false) # hide
p2 = plot(s2[1, :], s2[2, :], title = "Latin Hypercube Sampling", seriestype=:scatter, label = false) # hide
plot(p1, p2)
plot(p1, p2; size = (800, 400)) # hide
```

For a `PEtabODEProblem`, Latin hypercube sampled points within the parameter bounds can be generated with the `get_startguesses` function:

```@docs; canonical=false
get_startguesses
```

For our working example, we can generate 50 starting guesses with:

```@example 1
import Random # hide
Random.seed!(123) # hide
x0s = get_startguesses(petab_prob, 50)
nothing # hide
```

In principle, `x0s` can now be used together with `calibrate` to perform multi-start parameter estimation. But, to further simplify this process, PEtab.jl provides a convenient function, `calibrate_multistart`, which combines start-guess generation and parameter estimation in one step:

```@docs; canonical=false
calibrate_multistart
```

Two important keyword arguments for `calibrate_multistart` are `dirsave` and `nprocs`. If `nprocs > 1`, the parameter estimation runs are performed in parallel using the [`pmap`](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/Distributed/#Distributed.pmap) function from Distributed.jl with `nprocs` processes. While `pmap` requires that everything is loaded on each process, which creates an overhead, if the multistart parameter estimation on a single process takes longer than 5 minutes, running in parallel often greatly reduces the total runtime. Moreover, `dirsave` specifies an optional directory to continuously save the results from each individual run. We **strongly recommend** providing such a directory, as parameter estimation for larger models can take hours or even days. If something goes wrong with the computer during that time, it is, to put it mildly, frustrating to lose all the results. For our working example, we can perform 50 multistarts in parallel on two processes with:

```@example 1
ms_res = calibrate_multistart(petab_prob, IPNewton(), 50; nprocs = 2,
                              dirsave="path_to_save_directory")
```

The results are returned as a `PEtabMultistartResult`, which, in addition to printout statistics, contains relevant information for each run:

```@docs; canonical=false
PEtabMultistartResult
```

Finally, a common approach to evaluate the result of multi-start parameter estimation is through plotting. One widely used evaluation plot is the waterfall plot, which shows the final objective values for each run:

```@example 1
plot(ms_res; plot_type=:waterfall)
```

In the waterfall plot, each plateau corresponds to different local optima (represented by different colors). Since many runs (dots) are found on the plateau with the smallest objective value, we can be confident that the global optimum has been found. In addition to waterfall plots, more plotting options can be found on [this](@ref optimization_output_plotting) page.

## Creating an OptimizationProblem

[Optimization.jl](https://github.com/SciML/Optimization.jl) is a Julia package that provides a unified interface for over 100 optimization algorithms (see their [documentation](https://docs.sciml.ai/Optimization/stable/) for the complete list). While Optimization.jl is undoubtedly useful, it is currently undergoing heavy updates, so at the moment we do not recommend it as the default choice for parameter estimation.

The central object in Optimization.jl is the `OptimizationProblem`, and PEtab.jl directly supports converting a `PEtabODEProblem` into an `OptimizationProblem`:

```@docs; canonical=false
PEtab.OptimizationProblem
```

For our working example, we can create an `OptimizationProblem` with:

```@example 1
using Optimization
opt_prob = OptimizationProblem(petab_prob)
```

Given a start-guess `x0`, we can then estimate the parameters using, for example, Optim.jl's `ParticleSwarm()` method, with:

```@example 1
using OptimizationOptimJL
opt_prob.u0 .= x0
res = solve(opt_prob, Optim.ParticleSwarm())
```

which returns an `OptimizationSolution`. For more information on options and how to interact with `OptimizationSolution`, see the Optimization.jl [documentation](https://docs.sciml.ai/Optimization/stable/).

## References

```@bibliography
Pages = ["pest_method.md"]
Canonical = false
```
